Now in our entirety, Proverbs 21-5 says the plans of the diligent, surely lead to success,
but all who are hasty, surely head for poverty.
That is not a Bible law.
It's a Bible principle.
And before we discuss how Proverbs 21-5 might be applied, let's be reminded again of
the difference between a law and a principle.
We've had articles on it, we've had it discussed their circuit assembly.
But still, there are some of our congregations that would have a hard time making the
distinction between the two.
A principle, just one principle, can be broadly applied to many different situations and
decisions in life.
Whereas a Bible law, it addresses just one very precise, very specific action.
You can turn to 1 Corinthians 6, verse 9, and 10.
Many some areas of life Jehovah has explicit commands or laws.
And here in 1 Corinthians 6, 9, and 10, it reflects some of those laws of God.
Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God's kingdom do not be misled?
Those who are sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts,
and who practice homosexuality, thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners
will not inherit God's kingdom.
These represent some laws of God.
Do not commit adultery, that's a law.
Do not steal, do not become a drunkard.
Those are laws.
Very clear, there's no interpretation necessary.
It's a yes or no do or don't situation.
But what about principles?
How do they differ from laws?
Well, a principle is a basic truth in God's word that can help us to make good decisions.
Now as Christians, we all face situations in life for which there's no regulation in the Bible.
We have to reason things out and make a decision.
Just illustrates, suppose you're driving the countryside and there's a herd of deer
running towards the road.
But what will you do?
Well, there's no law that says you should speed up and get there before they do.
There's no law that says no, just continue at 55 miles an hour and see what happens.
But what would you likely do?
Well, you would slow down the car.
And how could you make that decision without a law?
You reasoned on the principle and the principle is safety and you made a good decision.
Or there's a sign, 55 miles an hour.
Now that is a law.
You're not to go over 55 and that section of the roadway.
But what if it was a blinding rainstorm?
Would you insist on going 55 miles an hour because it's allowed?
No, again, using the very same principle of safety, you would slow down and make a good decision.
So there was two situations, no law, but by applying the same principle, you made a good decision.
But do we have some examples of principles that could be applied as we make decisions on life's roadway?
How about Romans 153?
The Christ did not please himself.
Can you imagine how many situations in life that would instantly answer our question as to what we should do?
Or James before, friendship with the world is enmity with God.
That could be applied to associations, to movies, to music, to clothing styles, and so much more.
So when some issue or decision is about to jump out in front of us, we need to slow down and search for a principle.
Please find Ephesians chapter 5.
It has a phrase that coincides with searching for a principle.
What were you verse 15, first of all?
It says, so keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise, but as wise persons.
Well, that could be simply obeying a Bible law.
Do not commit adultery, do not steal.
Keeps strict watch that you act wisely.
But now notice verse 17, it's worded differently.
It says, on this account, stop being unreasonable.
So it's alluding to the fact that we should reason on a matter.
And here's what it says, but keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.
So in this case, there's no law spelling out exactly what we do, but we have to perceive.
That means we search for and apply a Bible principle and we're perceiving what God's will is.
Now, not trying to complicate matters, but sometimes a specific law of God is underpinned by a basic truth or principle.
For example, Deuteronomy 22, 8, it was a law that Israelites had to build a parapet wall around the flat roof of their home.
Prevent people from following being injured or possibly killed.
That was a law.
But what was the underlying principle?
It was respect for human life.
And that principle can be applied to so many circumstances in life now.
Respect for human life.
For example, there's nothing in the Bible that talks about tobacco products.
But a person coming into truth makes a good decision by applying the principle respect for life, his own life and the health of others.
So our text proverbs 21, 5, it's a principle.
It means it can be applied to so many different situations in our life.
And again, it says the plans of the diligent surely lead to success, but all who are hasty, surely head for property.
So what are some situations that our publications have applied that principle to?
But one is commenting on meetings.
We have to plan ahead to have success.
Or maybe we're in some form of full-time service.
And our parents become seriously ill.
Well, proverbs 21, 5 said, do not be hasty.
So we should not hastily conclude that we have to give up our privilege of service.
Possibly by planning, we could surely have success.
Living within one's means financially, proverbs 21, 5.
And this case, the plan has a name. It's called a budget.
But then we have people making decisions on who will they marry, do not be hasty.
Or maybe a couple deciding whether to have children or not.
Don't make a hasty decision.
Look beyond that cute little, cooing baby face and consider the pros and cons.
Well, our brother's approaching retirement age, proverbs 21, 5, will help him make a good decision.
So that's just a sampling of the variety of situations that this one verse can help us to make good decisions.
We're so thankful to Jehovah that he has provides specific laws that we must obey.
But he's also given us a host of principles that can help us make good decisions.
And by implementing both of those in our life, we can maintain a clean conscience before our God.